% \input awffonts % should be *before* atexinfo.tex
\input atexinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename vxl.info
@settitle BOXM2
@setchapternewpage odd
@paragraphindent 0
@c Set up printed page layout.
@iftex
@afourlatex
@end iftex


@ifset makeinfo
@macro anchor{label}
@end macro
@macro ejectallfigures
@end macro
@end ifset

@c Define the @caption{1} macro
@ifnottex
@macro caption{figurenumber}
@quotation
@strong{Figure \figurenumber\:}
@end macro
@macro endcaption
@end quotation
@end macro
@macro figure
@end macro
@end ifnottex

@c Define the chapsummary macro
@ifnottex
@macro chapsummary
@quotation
@strong{Chapter summary}:@*
@c @cartouche
@end macro

@macro endchapsummary
@c @end cartouche
@end quotation
@end macro
@end ifnottex

@iftex
@tex
\gdef\chapsummary{
@quotation
@cartouche
@strong{Chapter summary}:
}
\gdef\endchapsummary{
@Ecartouche
@Equotation
}
@end tex
@end iftex

@c Define the @vxl{} macro.  v, slanted x, l
@iftex
@macro vxl
v{@sl x}l
@end macro
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@macro vxl
vxl
@end macro
@ifhtml
@macro vxl
v@emph{x}l
@end macro
@end ifhtml
@end ifnottex

@c Define the @LaTeX{} macro
@iftex
@tex
\gdef@LaTeX{L\kern-.36em%
        {\setbox0\hbox{T}\vbox to\ht0{\hbox{\smallrm A}\vss}}%
        \kern-.15em\TeX}
@end tex
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@macro LaTeX
LaTeX
@end macro
@end ifnottex

@c Define the @inputclass{name} macro
@macro inputclass{name}
inputclass \name\
@end macro

@c Define @ttb{text}: teletype bold
@iftex
@macro ttb{text}
@newdimen@ttbskip@ttbskip=.5pt@c
@setbox0@hbox{@kern-0.5em\text\}@c
@copy0@kern-@wd0@kern@ttbskip@unhbox0@kern-@ttbskip@c
@end macro
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@macro ttb{text}
@strong{\text\}
@end macro
@end ifnottex

@c %**end of header

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)

@ifinfo
This documents the Boxm2 Library (Accelerated Octree Modeling in C++ and OpenCL).

Code developed by Computer Vision Group, Inc.

@end ifinfo

@c  This title page illustrates only one of the
@c  two methods of forming a title page.

@iftex
@titlepage
@title V@emph{X}L
@subtitle A C++ and OpenCL library for volumetric octree modeling.
@author CVG

@c  The following two commands start the copyright page.
@c @page
@c @vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c Copyright @copyright{} 2011 Computer Vision Group, Inc.
@c @end titlepage
@c @shortcontents
@c @contents
@end iftex

@menu
* Introduction::
* data::
* io::
* cpp::
* ocl::
* demo::
* Index::
@end menu

@comment ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Introduction, data, Top, Top
@comment node-name, next,           previous, up
@chapter Introduction
@cindex Introduction

@include chapter_intro.texi

@comment ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    data, io, Introduction, Top
@comment node-name, next, previous,     up
@chapter Boxm2 Data Structures
@cindex data


@include chapter_data.texi

@comment ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    io, cpp, data, Top
@comment node-name, next, previous,     up
@chapter Boxm2 IO Package
@cindex io

@include chapter_io.texi

@comment ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    cpp, ocl, io, Top
@comment node-name, next, previous,     up
@chapter cpp: Boxm2 C++ Package.
@cindex probability
@cindex pdf
@cindex multivariate
@cindex Gaussian


@include chapter_cpp.texi

@comment ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    ocl, demo, cpp, Top
@comment node-name, next, previous,     up
@chapter Boxm2 OpenCL Accelerated Package

@include chapter_ocl.texi

@comment ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    demo, Index, ocl, Top
@comment node-name, next, previous,     up
@chapter Boxm2 GUI demo

@include chapter_demo.texi

@comment ------------------------------------------------------------------
@c @node    Index,  , clsfy, Top
@c        node-name,    next, previous,        up
@c @unnumbered Index

@c @printindex cp

@bye
