
@chapsummary
General utilities used by several mul libraries.
@endchapsummary

@section Random Number Generator
@cindex mbl_mz_random
@cindex mz_random
@subsection The randomness of mbl_mz_random


I was using a vpdfl_axis_gaussian_sampler to produce some test data, and
there seemed to be too many outliers. I was worried about the randomness
of the mbl_mz_random::normal(), so I ran some tests.

@subsubsection Tim's rank diagram test
@itemize
@item Sort the samples
@item plot rank vs @math{P(x' < x)}
@item i.e. plot i vs @math{0.5*(1+erf(x/sqrt(2))}
@enditemize

@image (mbl_mz_random_graph1)

This seems normal.

@subsubsection Testing specifically for outliers.

For a seed of 123456, the numbers of outliers at 1, 2, 3, and 4 s.d.
were all greater than the expected value. This bias was reduced
but still evident when the number of samples was increased from 10^4 to 10^5 and 10^6.

The results for a key of  9667566 are
Got 3183 samples outside 1 sd- expected3174
Got 463 samples outside 2 sd- expected455
Got 28 samples outside 3 sd- expected27.5
Got 0 samples outside 4 sd- expected0.6

These seem @emph{more normal}.

@subsubsection Testing distribution of outliers separations.

One further possibility is that there might be correlation between adjacent samples. So
I counted the separations (number of samples) between outliers (those that exceeded 2 standard deviations), and plotted the distribution of intervals, along with the expected distribution.
The first graph is for a seed of 123456, and the second for a seed of 9667566.
(Note: The key on the following two graphs is reversed.)

@image (mbl_mz_random_graph2)
@image (mbl_mz_random_graph3)

@subsubsection Conclusions

There does not appear to be a persistent bias in the number of outliers as
the seed is modified.

A seed of 123456 does seem to give more outliers than expected, and in particular
gives more adjacent outliers that expected - which can have significant effects
on 2-D test data set generation.

Use a different seed 9667566

Ian Scott
29 November 2000
