@section Basic structure

The directory structure of @vxl{x} is below
@example
  $VXLSRC/vcl
          core/vnl
              /vul
              /vbl
              /vil
              /vgl
              /vsl
             @dots{}
          v3p/netlib
             /jpeg
             @dots{}
          config/cmake
          contrib/
@end example

@table @samp
@item vcl
is the C++ compatibility layer (@pxref{vcl}).

@item core
contains the core @vxl{x} libraries.

@item v3p
(v-third-party) contains code that is available elsewhere and is used
in implementing @vxl{x}. @code{v3p/netlib} contains cleaned-up C
versions of the high-quality Fortran code. @code{v3p/jpeg} and others
contain image file format code used by vil. In theory, you don't need
any of of the v3p libraries if you have locally installed versions. In
practice, you need @code{v3p/netlib} but not the others.  the

@item config/cmake
contains the configuration files used by the CMake build system
(@pxref{CMake}).

@end table

@anchor{struct_other_packages}
@section Other packages

On the repository and some @vxl{x} distributions, you will find several other
packages in the @samp{contrib} directory.

@cindex gel
@cindex oxl
@cindex mul
@cindex rpl
@cindex brl
@cindex tbl
@cindex oul

@table @samp
@item gel
Published libraries from General Electric Global Research.
@item oxl
Published libraries from the Robots Research
Group at Oxford University.
@item mul
Published libraries from Imaging Science and Biomedical Engineering
at the University of Manchester.
@item rpl
Published libraries from Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute
@item brl
Published libraries from Brown University
@item tbl
A set of image processing libraries.
@item oul
Published libraries from Otago University
@item conversions
A set of routines for converting between various @vxl{x} and non-@vxl{x} types.
@end table

These modules are presented as useful code, with even less guarantees
than @vxl{x} (which is not to suggest that we guarantee anything about
@vxl{x}).  In particular they may not work as advertised. They may not
be documented. If you find them useful, and think they deserve full
@vxl{x}-status please contact the library's author to see about having
the code tidied up and promoted to @vxl{x}.

You can find any overview documentation about these modules from the
@uref{http://vxl.sourceforge.net/,vxl homepage} by following the
``documentation'' link.

@section CVS Repository

The VXL repository is provided by SourceForge---Thanks guys! The
instructions for downloading @vxl{x} are documented at
@url{http://vxl.sourceforge.net/#download}.
