Before anything else, let's look at some VXL example programs.

@subsection Hello world
Here's one to print "Hello world":
@example
// Include standard C++ input/output library
#include <vcl_iostream.h>

// main is the first function to be called
int main()
@{
  // send string "hello world" to the standard
  // output stream cout.
  vcl_cout << "Hello world\n";

  // Must return something from main
  return 0;
@}
@end example
This is the same example that one might see in any C++ book, but for the
include line at the start.  C++ books assume that your C++ compiler works,
which is not true of any C++ compiler in the year 2000.  Chapter 3 goes
into more detail, but for the moment, include standard headers such as
@code{<cstdio>} using @code{<vcl_cstdio.h>}.

@subsection Loading an image

Because most vxl programs use images in some form, here's an example of
loading an image, and printing the pixel value at (100,100).  It assumes
the image is greyscale, and does no error checking.

@example
#include <vcl_iostream.h>
#include <vil/vil_load.h>
#include <vil/vil_memory_image_of.h>

int main()
@{
  // Load image information from disk, don't load image yet.
  vil_image img = vil_load("foo.ppm");

  // Load image into 2D array of bytes in memory.
  vil_memory_image_of<unsigned char> buf(img);

  // Access pixel (100,100) and print its value as an int.
  vcl_cerr << "Pixel 100,100 = " << (int) buf(100,100) << vcl_endl;
@}
@end example

@section Debugging

@subsection What kind of class is @code{*p}?

If printing p shows it has a vptr, then you can figure out its type
using

@comment What versions of gdb and gcc does the following work with?
@example
(gdb) p p
$16 = (vil_file_format *) 0x80ea460
(gdb) p *p
$17 = @{_vptr. = 0x80e9100@}
(gdb) p (int (*)())(*p).'_vptr.'[1].__pfn
$15 = (int (*)(void)) 0x80c5578 <vil_tiff_file_format::~vil_tiff_file_format(void)>
@end example

or, with later versions of gdb and g++ (this example with gdb 4.18 and
gcc 2.95.2),

@example
(gdb) p in.ptr
$7 = (vil_image_impl *) 0x8050000
(gdb) p (int (*)())(in.ptr._vptr$)
$8 = (int (*)(void)) 0x28172ec0 <vil_pnm_generic_image virtual table>
@end example
