@chapsummary
Metric entities, co-ordinate systems and transformations.
@endchapsummary

This non-core Level 2 library @code{vcsl} is intended to provide an environment
for representing co-ordinate systems, transformations, dimensions, and metric
units.

This includes classes for
@itemize @bullet
@item Radians, degrees, and meters.
@item 2D and 3D Cartesian co-ordinate systems
@item Various polar co-ordinate systems
@item Various geographic co-ordinate systems.
@item Various Transformations
@end itemize

@section Contents
@subsection Metric and Dimensional classes

@itemize @bullet
  @item @code{vcsl_dimension} - Abstract dimension
  @itemize @bullet
    @item @code{vcsl_length}
    @item @code{vcsl_angle}
  @end itemize

  @item @code{vcsl_unit} - Abstract unit associated to a dimension
  @itemize @bullet
    @item @code{vcsl_length_unit}
    @itemize @bullet
      @item @code{vcsl_meter} - This is the standard length unit
    @end itemize
    @item @code{vcsl_angle_unit}
    @itemize @bullet
      @item @code{vcsl_radian} - This is the standard angular unit
      @item @code{vcsl_degree}
    @end itemize
  @end itemize
@end itemize

@subsection Co-ordinate Systems and Transformations
@itemize @bullet
  @item @code{vcsl_coordinate_system}
  @itemize @bullet
    @item @code{vcsl_cartesian_2d}
    @item @code{vcsl_cartesian_3d}
    @item @code{vcsl_cylindrical}
    @item @code{vcsl_polar}
    @item @code{vcsl_spherical}
    @item @code{vcsl_geographic}
    @itemize @bullet
      @item @code{vcsl_geocentric} - Intended to represent a location relative to the earth
      @item @code{vcsl_geodetic} - Intended to represent a location relative to the earth
      @item @code{vcsl_lambertian} - Lambert Conformal Conic Projection
      @item @code{vcsl_utm} - Universal Transverse Mercator projection
    @end itemize
  @end itemize

  @item @code{vcsl_spatial_transformation}
  @itemize @bullet
    @item @code{vcsl_cylindrical_to_cartesian_3d}
    @item @code{vcsl_perspective}
    @item @code{vcsl_rotation} - Rotation about an axis through the origin
    @itemize @bullet
      @item @code{vcsl_displacement} - Rotation about a general axis
    @end itemize
    @item @code{vcsl_scale}
    @item @code{vcsl_translation}
    @item @code{vcsl_composition} - Composition of transformations
  @end itemize

  @item @code{vcsl_graph} - Represent multiple co-ordinate systems and transformation between them.

@end itemize

@section Examples

The following example shows how to use and build a set of co-ordinate systems.
@comment example written by Rob.Campbell@att.net
@example

#include <vcsl/vcsl_cartesian_3d.h>
#include <vcsl/vcsl_rotation.h>
#include <vcsl/vcsl_graph.h>
...
  //: Convenient indices for vectors representing points, etc.
  enum AXES @{ X, Y, Z, T @};

  //: Graph of defined CS (Co-ordinate system)
  // All CS must be added to this graph as they are created.
  vcsl_graph_sptr graphCS = new vcsl_graph;

  //: World Coordinate System
  // Equivalent to the Top view, by definition.
  //
  // A CS for which no parent is defined is absolute.  Logically,
  // there must be one absolute CS which all other directly or
  // indirectly relate to.
  vcsl_spatial_sptr WCS = new vcsl_cartesian_3d;

  // Add WCS to the global map of coordinate systems.
  WCS->set_graph(graphCS);

  // New CS can be defined relative to any point (translation) or
  // axis (rotation) in the parent CS.  But it is so common to do
  // so relative to the X, Y, or Z axes, that it is convenient to
  // define the corresponding vectors:

  //: x-axis vector
  vnl_vector_fixed <double, 3> xA;
  xA[X]=1; xA[Y] = 0; xA[Z] = 0;

  //: y-axis vector
  vnl_vector_fixed <double, 3> yA;
  yA[X]=0; yA[Y] = 1; yA[Z] = 0;

  //: z-axis vector
  vnl_vector_fixed <double, 3> zA;
  zA[X]=0; zA[Y] = 0; zA[Z] = 1;

  //: 90 degree rotation about WCS y-axis
  // Transforms from WCS to right CS
  vcsl_rotation rightXF;
  rightXF.set_static(vnl_math::pi_over_2, yA);

  //: WCS rotated 90 degrees about the y-axis to produce right hand view/CS
  vcsl_spatial_sptr right = new vcsl_cartesian_3d;
  right->set_graph(graphCS);
  right->set_unique(WCS, &rightXF);

  //: Corner of a box with opposite corner at origin of WCS.
  vnl_vector_fixed <double, 3> corner;
  corner[X] = 1; corner[Y] = 2; corner[Z] = 3;

  // By inspection, corner should be (-3,2,1) in 'right' CS
  vnl_vector<double> cornerXF = WCS->from_local_to_cs(corner, right, 0);

  vcl_cout << cornerXF.x() << ", " << cornerXF.y() << ", " << cornerXF.z() << '\n';
@end example

@section Further Work

@enumerate
@item Write conversion between classic coordinate systems in the same than the
class vcsl_cylindrical_to_cartesian_3d (singleton pattern)
    @itemize @bullet
    @item @code{vcsl_spherical_to_cartesian_3d}
    @item @code{vcsl_polar_to_cartesian_2d}
    @item @code{vcsl_geocentric_to_cartesian_3d}
    @item @code{vcsl_geodetic_to_cartesian_3d}
    @item @code{vcsl_lambertian_to_cartesian_3d}
    @item @code{vcsl_utm_to_cartesian_3d}
    @end itemize

@item Add other units and dimensions

@item In @code{vcsl_spatial_transformation}, add
@example
//: May `this' have a matrix representation ?
virtual bool is_linear(void) const=0;

//: Homogeneous matrix of `this' at time `time'
// REQUIRE: is_valid()
// REQUIRE: is_linear()
virtual vnl_matrix<double> matrix_value(const double time, bool type) const;
@end example
@end enumerate
