@chapsummary
General utilities are often handy.  vul has a few.
@endchapsummary

Like vbl, vul also provides some basic utilities. The difference is
philosophical: vbl includes things that could be thought of as extending
the STL, while vul provides just plain utilities which don't claim to be
useful or general enough to incorporate into the STL, and may not follow
the spirit of the STL. The key elements of this library are:

@deffn class @code{vul_file}
@deffnx class @code{vul_directory}
File handling utilities, directory reading
@end deffn

@deffn class @code{vul_url}
Downloading files over HTTP.
@end deffn

@deffn {class template} @code{vul_arg}
Parse command-line arguments conveniently.
@end deffn

@deffn class @code{vul_redirector}
Simplify redirection of standard output/error
@end deffn

@deffn class @code{vul_awk}
Read text files, breaking each line into fields.
@end deffn

@deffn class @code{vul_reg_exp}
Regular expression matching.
@end deffn

@section Redirecting standard output: @code{vul_redirector}

@cindex vcl_cerr
@cindex vcl_cout
@cindex redirecting ostreams
@cindex vul_redirector
@anchor{vul_redirector}

The class @code{vul_redirector} is provided to simplify the task of
filtering the output of @code{vcl_cerr} and @code{vcl_cout}, a common requirement
in graphical applications.  This encapsulates some of the subtleties of
deriving from @code{vcl_streambuf}, providing a simpler interface.

The basic usage is to subclass from @code{vul_redirector}, implementing the
@code{putchunk} method, which is then called whenever characters are ready
for output.  The @code{vul_redirector} constructor takes care of attaching
the new buffer to the stream, and of restoring the original behaviour on
destruction.  Here is a simple example, which switches output on or off
depending on the value of a global flag;
@example

#include <vul/vul_redirector.h>

bool on = true;

struct my_redirector : vul_redirector @{
  my_redirector(vcl_ostream& s): vul_redirector(s) @{@}
  int putchunk(char const* buf, int n) @{
    if (on)
      return vul_redirector::put_passthru(buf, n);
    else
      return n;
  @}
@};
@end example
and here is a calling program which exercises the example.
@example
int main(int argc, char* argv[])
@{
  vcl_cerr << "hi\n";
  @{
    my_redirector redir(vcl_cerr);
    on = false;
    vcl_cerr << "magic\n";
  @}
  vcl_cerr << "what did I miss?\n";
  return 0;
@}
@end example

When this program is run, the word @code{magic} is not displayed, because
@code{my_redirector::putchunk} finds that @code{on == false}.  Question,
what to you think @code{put_passthru} does?  What happens if you set
@code{on = true} on line 6?


@section Complex output formatting: @code{vul_printf}

@cindex vcl_printf
@cindex vul_printf

While it is possible to achieve all of the functionality
of the C @code{printf} function in C++, it is very very difficult.
There are many times when programs can be made clearer by the use
of printf formatting, rather than the standard iostream operators.
On the other hand, one needs iostreams for type-safe (and convenient)
output of user-defined objects.  Thus vul provides a stream-aware
version, @code{vul_printf}:
@smallexample
vcl_ostream& vul_printf(vcl_ostream&, char const* format, ...);
@end smallexample
so that one can say, for example,
@smallexample
vul_printf(vcl_cerr, "Line %05d, Code %-30s\n", __LINE__, code);
@end smallexample


@section Reading command-line arguments: @code{vul_arg}

@cindex argc, argv
@cindex vul_arg
@cindex command-line arguments, reading
@cindex ArgParse, new name vul_arg
@cindex Arg, new name vul_arg

My favourite bit of vul is the @code{vul_arg} header which provides the
easiest way to parse command-line arguments that I've seen.  The basic idea
is that a minimal specification for a command-line argument includes: the
argument's type, a variable to hold it, its flag, and possibly some
descriptive text and a default value.

In the default, easy to use (and a bit naughty) form, each argument is
declared anywhere in the program, like so:
@smallexample
   vul_arg<double> my_threshold("-fudge", "Twiddle fudge", 1.7);
   //     Type     Variable     Flag      Help text        Default
@end smallexample
and when @code{vul_arg_parse} is called, all the arguments are gathered,
and extracted from the command line.  To use an argument anywhere in the
program, use its @code{()} operator:
@example
   vcl_cerr << "The threshold = " << my_threshold() << vcl_endl;
@end example
To check if an argument was changed from its default value, one can check
@code{bool my_threshold.set()}.

Here is a complete example which uses @code{vul_arg}.  I tend to give these
argument variables names beginning with @code{a_}, but don't let that put
you off.
@example
#include <vcl_iostream.h>
#include <vul/vul_arg.h>

vul_arg<double> a_naughty_global_arg("-hack", "Fudge", 1.2);

void main(int argc, char* argv[])
@{
  vul_arg<char const*>     a_filename(0, "Input filename");
  vul_arg<bool>            a_fast("-fast", "Go fast", false);
  vul_arg_parse(argc, argv);

  vcl_cerr << "Filename [" << a_filename() << "]\n";
@}
@end example
Passing a @code{0} as the flag string means that the argument is
obligatory, and will be taken as the first unparsed word on the command
line.

@subsection Help text

The help text supplied with each argument is used to provide a summary of
options when the special argument @code{-?} is seen.  Running this example
with the @code{-?} flag produces the output.

@smallexample
Usage: ./example_vul_arg.exe [-hack float] string [-fast bool]

REQUIRED:
         string       Input filename  ['-']

Optional:
  Switch Type         Help [value]

   -hack float        Quick hack factor  [1.2]
   -fast bool         Go fast  [not set]
@end smallexample

@subsection Lists of numbers

A very useful specialization also exists to read ranges of numbers.
Imagine a program called makemovie which operates on a list of frames,
specified on the command line:
@example
makemovie -frames 1:10,9:-1:1,0,0,0,0
@end example
These can be easily read into a @code{vcl_list<int>}:
@example
#include <vcl_list.h>
vul_arg<vcl_list<int> >  a_frame_list("-frames", "List of indices");
@end example
The list will preserve the order specified on the command line, so in the
above example, the result of printing the list would be
@smallexample
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 0
@end smallexample
As a gratuitous STL example, here is the code that printed that list
@cindex STL: copy example
@smallexample
vcl_copy(a_frame_list().begin(), a_frame_list().end(),
         vcl_ostream_iterator<int>(vcl_cout, " "));
@end smallexample

@subsection More structured argument handling

Of course, it's disgraceful programming practice to throw args around ones
program higgledy piggledy, so one can collect arguments in objects of type
@code{vul_arg_list}.


@section Timing operations: vul_timer

@cindex time, measuring elapsed
@cindex vul_timer
@cindex cpu time

If you want to measure elapsed time, for example to find out how long a
section of your program takes to run, use the @code{vul_timer} class.  When
a @code{vul_timer} is initialized, like so, it records the current time.
@example
   vul_timer mytimer;
@end example
Later, you can find out the elapsed time using the @code{real()} method:
@example
   vcl_cerr << "That took " << mytimer.real() << " milliseconds\n";
@end example
If you want to reset the timer to make a new measurement, use the
@code{mark()} method.
@example
   mytimer.mark();  // Reset and start counting from zero again.
@end example

If you are running other jobs on your computer, you might like to know how
much time was used by your program alone.  For that, one would use the
@code{user()} method.
@example
   vcl_cerr << "Of which " << mytimer.user() << "ms was actually me\n";
@end example
In general, it is better to use the @code{real}, ``wall-clock'' elapsed
time, as the CPU time returned by user can fail to include work carried out
on your program's behalf by the operating system.  For example, if you're
using a lot of memory, the system will swap pages in and out of virtual
memory, and your program will run slowly, but @code{user()} will not report
it.

Finally, there's a super-convenient @code{print} method, which is used
to just print the real and user times to a stream without any
formatting, for quick testing purposes.  Here's an example
@example
  vul_timer tic; // Start timing
  // do stuff
  tic.print(vcl_cerr); // Print times to vcl_cerr.
@end example


@section Reading ASCII files: @code{vul_awk}

@cindex awk
@cindex perl-like operations: vul_awk
@cindex file handling: vul_awk

It is often convenient to read text files a line at a time, and split each
line into space-separated fields.  The @code{vul_awk} class is an easy way
to do this.  It also adds a few handy extras like stripping comments, and
remembering the line number for error messages.  It is used like this:
@smallexample
   vcl_ifstream thefile("myfile.txt");
   vul_awk awk(thefile); // initialize and read 1st line
   for (; awk; ++awk) @{
     vcl_cerr << "Field 0 = " << awk[0] << vcl_endl;
     vcl_cerr << "Field 2 = " << awk[2] << vcl_endl;
   @}
@end smallexample
If @code{myfile.txt} contained the text
@smallexample
  dapple dawn-drawn falcon,
  solihull 1  grimsby 3
@end smallexample
the above program would print
@smallexample
  Field 0 = dapple
  Field 2 = falcon,
  Field 0 = solihull
  Field 2 = grimsby
@end smallexample

@section Regular expression parsing: @code{vul_reg_exp}

@cindex regular expressions
@cindex vul_reg_exp
A regular expression allows a programmer to specify complex patterns that
can be searched for and matched against the character string of a string
object. In its simplest form, a regular expression is a sequence of
characters used to search for exact character matches. However, many times
the exact sequence to be found is not known, or only a match at the
beginning or end of a string is desired. The vul regular expression class
implements regular expression pattern matching as is found and implemented
in many UNIX commands and utilities, notably perl.  The perl code
@example
   $filename =~ m"([a-z]+)\.h";
   print $1;
@end example
is written as follows in @vxl{x}
@example
   vul_reg_exp re("([a-z]+)\\.h");
   re.find(filename);
   vcl_cerr << re.match(1);
@end example

The vul syntax is similar to perl's, although not quite as clean.  Here are
the metacharacters:
@example
 ^        Matches at beginning of a line
 $        Matches at end of a line
 .        Matches any single character
[ ]       Matches any character(s) inside the brackets
[^ ]      Matches any character(s) not inside the brackets
 -        Matches any character in range on either side of a dash
 *        Matches preceding pattern zero or more times
 +        Matches preceding pattern one or more times
 ?        Matches preceding pattern zero or once only
()        Saves a matched expression and uses it in a later match.
@end example
Note that more than one of these metacharacters can be used in a single
regular expression in order to create complex search patterns. For example,
the pattern @code{[^ab1-9]} says to match any character sequence that does
not begin with the characters "ab" followed by numbers in the series 1-9.


@section Loading files using Internet protocols: @code{vul_url}

@cindex HTTP
@cindex vul_url

@code{vul_url} provides a useful means of downloading files over the internet.
For example, if you used to have code like this
@example
bool read_ascii(vcl_istream &);
...
int main() @{
...
  vcl_ifstream  input(filename);
  if (!(!input))
    read_ascii(input);
  input.close;
...
@end example
You can get this code to work, even if @code{filename} begins with @code{"http://"}
by modifying your code to look like.
@example
bool read_ascii(vcl_istream &);
...
int main() @{
...
  vcl_istream  *p_input = vul_url::open(filename);
  if (p_input != 0 && !(!(*input)))
    read_ascii(*input);
  delete input;
...
@end example
This will now work both when filename is an HTTP URL and when it is an ordinary filename.
