@chapsummary
Load images using @code{vil_load}.  Access them using a @code{vil_image_view<T>}.
@endchapsummary

The @vxl{x} image library has evolved from the TargetJr and Manchester Image
libraries.
As with its predecessors, its primary goals is to provide flexible access
to all 2D images, including those too large to fit in
the address space of a single program or process, and very powerful and
fast access to images in memory.  In fact, both cases need similar
treatment: even in-core images are assumed to be sufficiently large (say a
megabyte) that special care must be taken to avoid unnecessary copying of
their data.  In both cases, the normal requirements of efficiency and
ease-of-use apply.  The system must allow:
@itemize @bullet
@item Beginners to have easy access to an image type.  This image type
should also be the default image type for an programmer writing
image processing code.  This image type must be very efficient to use.

@item Fast access to images on disk, at no more than a 10% speed penalty
for operations on images in memory.

@item Fast loading of subsets of the image data.  To look at a
small portion of a 10000 by 10000 pixel satellite image, one should
not have to load the entire 300 megabytes into memory.

@item Efficient memory management, both automatic and programmer-mediated.
Automatic management is vital during program development, when the code is
changing quickly.  On the other hand, release builds need the kind of
optimisations that only a human can apply.
@end itemize

This vil library is the second VXL image library, and is sometimes referred
to as vil2.  The original @vxl{a} image library vil1 is deprecated.

You can read more about the design philosophy in @code{$VXLSRC/core/vil/notes.html}

@section Loading and saving

Let's look at an example of vil in use.  This program makes an image from a
disk file, copies it into memory, and prints the pixel at
100,100.

@example
#include <vcl_iostream.h>
#include <vxl_config.h>
#include <vil/vil_rgb.h>
#include <vil/vil_load.h>
#include <vil/vil_image_view.h>

int main()
@{
  vil_image_view<vil_rgb<vxl_byte> > img;
  img = vil_load("foo.ppm");
  vcl_cerr << "Pixel 100,100 = " << img(100,100) << vcl_endl;
@}
@end example

The first interesting line declares img to be an image. vil_image_view
is the basic image type.  It represents an image in memory about
whose structure, size and pixel type we know everything.
Hence we need to specify the pixel type at this point.

Now let's skip to the end to explain the pixel access method.
@example
  img(100,100)
@end example
This looks up the pixel at position 100,100 and returns its value.  The
pixel type was defined on the first line to be an rgb of bytes, and
that is what will be displayed.
@example
[255 128 128]
@end example
Where it matters (such as when loading
an image in from disk) it is assumed that the image origin is at the
top left of the image.

Finally lets look at the middle line.  This consists of two parts.
The @code{vil_load} function does a lot of work behind the scenes
to determine what the image type is, and then load that image into
memory.  The second part is the assignment which has several special properties.
@itemize @bullet
@item It does not copy the actual image data.  A @code{vil_image_view} object
is really a view of some underlying data.  The view understands where the
real image data is in memory and how to interpret it.  When you copy
a view, you merely copy this interpretation information, not the actual
image data.  This is important, because often images are very big, and
copying is expensive.  The underlying image is managed with smart pointers
so when the last view to the underlying data is destroyed, the image data
will be too.

@item It can do cheap conversions between different views of the same image.
@code{vil_load} by default loads the image as 3 planes, with the pixel
type as @code{vxl_byte}.  It is trivial to reconfigure a @code{vil_image_view}
so that it views the same image data as one plane of rgb pixels.  The
assignment will automatically do any cheap conversion necessary.  You may
ask then, how is that we know that the pixel type can be viewed as RGB of bytes?
Here, we simply know that our image foo.ppm is this type.  In general you can
either find out what the pixel type is before you load the image, or
you can force it to whatever pixel type you want.  The latter may involve
a relatively expensive pixel by pixel conversion, so this will not happen
automatically.
@end itemize


@subsection Loading and saving: The threshold program

@cindex threshold example
@cindex vil_save
@cindex vil_convert
Anyway, the usual next step in demonstrating an image handling library is
to show thresholding, so let's have a look.  This program loads an image
into memory, forcing it to RGB byte format, and creates a new image where
all pixels greater than a threshold value are set to 0.
@example
#include <vxl_config.h>
#include <vil/vil_rgb.h>
#include <vil/vil_load.h>
#include <vil/vil_save.h>
#include <vil/vil_image_view.h>
#include <vil/vil_convert.h>

int main(int argc, char **argv)
@{
  vil_image_view<vil_rgb<vxl_byte> > img;
  img = vil_convert_to_component_order(
          vil_convert_to_n_planes(3,
                                  vil_convert_cast(vxl_byte(),
                                                   vil_load(argv[1]))));

  for (unsigned j = 0; j < img.nj(); ++j)
    for (unsigned i = 0; i < img.ni(); ++i)
      if (img(i,j).r < 200 && img(i,j).g < 200 && img(i,j).b < 200)
        img(i,j) = vil_rgb<vxl_byte>(0,0,0);

  vil_save(img, argv[2]);
  return 0;
@}
@end example

The call to @code{vil_save} sends the modified image in @var{img} to disk.
The choice of file format is determined automatically from the extension of
the filename.  If one wants more control, a string can be appended to specify the
format, e.g.
@cindex vil_save, choosing a specific file format
@example
  vil_save(buf, argv[2], "jpeg");
@end example
Of course, if your user has chosen a name such as "foo.ppm",
you'll have a oddly named image.


@section Copying an image

@cindex images, copying
You should know by now that copying @code{vil_image_view} objects does not
duplicate the data they point to.  This allows images to be passed into and
out of functions efficiently.  It also means that modifying the data in one
@code{vil_image_view} might change that in another.  Take this example
@example
...
vil_image_view<float> a( vil_convert_cast(float(), vil_load("x")) );
vil_image_view<float> b = a;
b(100,100) = 12;
...
@end example
After the assignment in line 3, both @var{a(100,100)} and @var{b(100,100)}
are set to the value 12.  On the other hand, if we had used
@code{vil_copy_deep}, thus:
@example
...
vil_image_view<float> a( vil_convert_cast(float(), vil_load("x")) );
vil_copy_deep(a, b);
b(100,100) = 12;
...
@end example
or
@example
...
vil_image_view<float> a( vil_load("x") );
vil_image_view<float> b( vil_copy_deep(a) );
b(100,100) = 12;
...
@end example
then @var{a} is unchanged after the assignment to @var{b(100,100)}.
Note again that the actual copying is done in @code{vil_copy_deep}; when the
return value is assigned to @var{b}, there is an efficient view copy.


@section Image resources

@cindex large images
@cindex external images
@cindex vil_image_resource_sptr

Broadly there are two sorts of image one is interested in
@itemize
@item images in memory, about which everything is known and
all parts of which can be accessed directly.
@item external images (eg in files) which can only be accessed
indirectly, or images about which we may currently be missing information
(eg pixel type.)
@end itemize

As we have seen the first sort of images are represented
by a @code{vil_image_view<T>} on the data in memory.
For some very large images it is not
possible or desirable to load them into memory.  In this case it is
useful to be able to load in a sub-section of the image,
manipulate it, and possible write it out again.  Alternatively
you may want to pass an image about, and process it without
knowing its pixel type. vil supports these second sort of images
using @code{vil_image_resource}.  You cannot create an image
resource object directly, instead you use a creation function
which returns a smart pointer to the base class
@code{vil_image_resource_sptr}.  When manipulating
@code{vil_image_resource}s it will almost entirely be in terms of
@code{vil_image_resource_sptr}s.
There are several types of
image resource, with different creation functions:

@itemize @bullet
@item Representing an image in a file: e.g. @code{vil_pnm_image},
@code{vil_jpeg_image}.  These are created using
@code{vil_load_image_resource()},
and @code{vil_new_image_resource()}.

@item @code{vil_memory_image}: Representing an image in memory
 This is created using
@code{vil_new_image_resource()}.  Alternatively if you want to
wrap an existing view up as a vil_image_resource you can call
@code{vil_new_image_resource_of_view()}

@item Representing a filtered version of an
image in a file (without loading in memory): e.g.
@code{vil_crop_image_resource} and
@code{vil_decimate_image_resource}.  These
are created using the equivalent functions: @code{vil_crop()},
@code{vil_decimate()}, etc.

@item Representing the outcome of an image
processing algorithm (see next section) e.g.
@code{vil_convolve_1d_resource}.
These are created using the equivalent
functions e.g. @code{vil_convolve_1d()}.

@end itemize

To actually get some image pixels you call the resource's
@code{get_view()} or @code{get_copy_view()} method.
For example, the @code{vil_load()} function works by creating
a @code{vil_image_resource}, and then calling @code{get_view()}
for the whole image.
@example
vil_image_view_base_sptr vil_load(char const* file)
@{
  vil_image_resource_sptr data = vil_load_image_resource(file);
  if (!data) return 0;
  return data -> get_view();
@}
@end example

To set image pixels, you call the resource's @code{put_view()}.


@subsection A rule of thumb.

@quotation
When developing an image processing algorithm,
first write your algorithm in terms of a function for @code{vil_image_view<T>}.
Then, if you need it, write the vil_image_resource_sptr version, using
the @code{vil_image_view<T>} version to do the actual pixel manipulation.
@end quotation

@code{vil_image_view<T>} is designed for playing with actual pixel values.
@code{vil_image_resource} derivatives are designed to handle all the other stuff
associated with images, e.g. choosing pixel types at runtime,
splitting an image into blocks so that it fits in memory,
dealing with the arbitrary and complex hassles of image IO.


@subsection Using @code{vil_memory_image} to ignore pixel type.

@cindex pixel-type, ignoring
@cindex vil_memory_image
@anchor{vil_memory_image}

As explained above, you should be using @code{vil_image_view<T>} to
actually manipulate your pixels.  However, in some parts of your
code, you may want to pass images around without having to decide
the pixel type at compile time.  This is a role for a
@code{vil_image_resource} derivative, in particular the
@code{vil_memory_image}.  You can wrap an existing
@code{vil_image_view<T>} in a @code{vil_memory_image} by calling
@code{vil_new_image_resource_of_view()}.  Reference counting keeps track
of the underlying data in memory, so you can let the original
view go out of scope without loss.

It may be tempting to use the @code{vil_image_view_base_sptr} for this
purpose instead.  That type is only intended for internal use by vil, and
it will almost certainly not behave as you want.

The @code{vil_image_resource} API has been designed to allow efficient
access to @code{vil_memory_image}.  In the example
below, if the image resource passed in is really a
@code{vil_memory_image}, the @code{get_view()} returns a view
to the underlying data, so no unneeded data copying happens.
Similarly, a call to @code{put_view()}, can return almost immediately,
checking only to confirm that the view is still pointing to
the same underlying data.

@example
void display_view(vil_image_resource_sptr &ir)
@{
  switch (ir->pixel_format())
  @{
   case VIL_PIXEL_FORMAT_BYTE: @{
    vil_image_view<vxl_byte> v1 = ir->get_view();
    display_byte(v1); @}
   case ...
  @}
@}
@end example


@section Planes, components and stepping.

@cindex image layout
@cindex planes
@cindex components
@cindex pixel-type

@code{vil_image_view}
uses a pointer arithmetic style of indexing.
The image data is assumed to be a regularly arranged set of
pixels in memory.  The view keeps a pointer to the pixel
at the origin.  It also keeps the pointer difference to
get to the next pixel to the right, the next pixel down,
and the same pixel in the next plane.

In a general image representation a 2d image
consists of multiple planes each containing multiple rasters (rows)
each containing multiple pixels, and each pixel contains multiple
components.  The planes and the components are used for the same
purpose, to represent different spectral or functional values (e.g. the
red, green and blue channels of an RGB image.) In vil it is usually
assumed that an image cannot have both multiple planes and multiple
components per pixel.  This allows
@code{vil_image_view} to view the same a colour image data
as either a 3 plane image or a 1 plane RGB image.  You can do this
explicitly by calling @code{vil_view_as_planes()} or
@code{vil_view_as_rgb()}.

However the two representations are not equal.  The
multi-plane representation
is more general than the RGB multi-component one.  If
the underlying data is actually stored RRRR..GGGG..BBBB..
then it is not possible to view that image as a single
plane of RGB pixels.  For this reason, a lot of vil prefers
to view an image as multi-plane single-component.  In particular,
the vil_image_resource derivatives in vil, will treat
all images as multi-plane, scalar component images, whether the
underlying data is RGBRGBRGB... or RRRR..GGGG..BBBB..  This means
if you have switch statement to deal with pixel
types in an normal image resource, you need not worry about any
types other than than the following
@itemize @bullet
@item bool
@item vxl_byte, vxl_sbyte
@item vxl_int_16, vxl_uint_16
@item vxl_int_32, vxl_uint_32
@item float, double
@item vcl_complex<float>, vcl_complex<double>
@end itemize

@cindex view manipulations
Similarly to the planes to components conversion
it is possible to perform a whole range of other manipulations.  These
include @code{vil_transpose()}, @code{vil_flip_ud()},
@code{vil_decimate()}, @code{vil_crop()}.
One further advantage of the arithmetic indexing scheme is that
it becomes easy to create a 2d slice view of a 3d image.


@section Algorithms and Image Processing

Several image processing functions can be found in the algo
subdirectory of vil.  Lets look at an example of finding the image
gradient using a Sobel filter.

@example
#include <vcl_iostream.h>
#include <vxl_config.h> // for vxl_byte
#include <vil/vil_image_view.h>
#include <vil/vil_print.h>
#include <vil/algo/vil_sobel_3x3.h>

int main()
@{
  unsigned ni=8;
  unsigned nj=15;
  unsigned nplanes=1;
  vil_image_view<vxl_byte> image(ni,nj,nplanes);

  for (unsigned p=0;p<nplanes;++p)
    for (unsigned j=0;j<nj;++j)
      for (unsigned i=0;i<ni;++i)
        image(i,j,p) = vxl_byte(i+10*j+100*p);

  vcl_cout<<"Original image:"<<vcl_endl;
  vil_print_all(vcl_cout,image);

  // Objects to hold gradients
  vil_image_view<float> grad_i,grad_j;

  vil_sobel_3x3(image,grad_i,grad_j);

  vcl_cout<<vcl_endl
          <<"Sobel I Gradient:"<<vcl_endl;
  vil_print_all(vcl_cout,grad_i);

  vcl_cout<<vcl_endl
          <<"Sobel J Gradient:"<<vcl_endl;
  vil_print_all(vcl_cout,grad_j);

  return 0;
@}
@end example

There are also algorithms to perform image arithmetic,
smoothing, general 1D and 2D
convolution, morphological operations, interpolation,
and much more.


@section Converting from using the old vil1 to vil.

This section explores the major differences between using the old vil1
and using vil, and some of the implications for converting existing code.

The first and most obvious difference is that whilst there is a broad equivalent to
@code{vil1_image}, and its descendants, this class tree has been split in two.  The abstract
@code{vil1_image} is now replaced with a smart pointer to a @code{vil_image_resource}.
The concrete @code{vil1_memory_image_of<T>} is now a @code{vil_image_view<T>}.
Whereas previously, you might have written code in terms of @code{vil1_image}, it now
usually makes sense to write most image manipulations in terms of
@code{vil_image_view<T>}s.  With the old @code{vil1_image}, you either had to
do a @code{get_section} and operate on raw memory, or do a messy switch statement to cast
it to its underlying @code{vil_memory_image_of<T>} type, or do an expensive
@code{vil1_view_as()} conversion.
Now with vil, the @code{vil_image_view<T>} provides a powerful view directly onto
your image in memory.

The @code{vil_image_view} provides such facilities
as compile-time type safety and switchable bounds checking.  It also acts as a
sort of canonicaliser.  A wide range of actual memory layouts can all be treated
identically and transparently while working through the @code{vil_image_view}.
Previously, in vil1, the image loader often needed read an unblocked resource and to have several filters placed
on top of it to do such things as re-order the raster rows and re-order the
component order. vil doesn't do this, but instead uses the vil_image_view to provide
a canonical view of whatever deranged image format your loader finds most efficient to
use.

The second important change is that vil provides full support for planes.  In many cases
accessing different image planes is directly equivalent to accessing different components.
Indeed, it is often preferable to view an image as a multi-planar rather than multi-component.
If your algorithms assume a single plane, it is however trivial to provide a wrapper function
which takes a multi-planar image and passes one plane at a time to your algorithm.  This
can be done with virtually no loss in efficiency, and indeed is how some of the code in
@code{vil/algo} is written.

To help convert existing code there is a script (@code{core/vil/scripts/vil1tovil.pl})
It converts as much code as it can.  However, it can really only deal with file and identifier
name changes.  There are large structural differences between vil1 and vil, with many of the
equivalent functions taking different parameters.  The output of the conversion script
can best be seen as a hint on which types and classes to use and which functions to call.
You will almost certainly need to make extensive further edits to your code to get it
to compile again.

If you do not want to convert any code, but would rather use an interface to convert
between vil1 and vil types at runtime, then take a look at @code{<vil1/vil1_vil.h>}
which has a function for converting between @code{vil1_memory_image_of} and @code{vil_image_view}, and
a class that wraps a @code{vil1_image}, and exports a @code{vil_image_resource} interface.


@section Frequently Asked Questions

@cindex Frequently Asked Questions
@cindex FAQ

@table @asis
@item Question 1

@quotation
I'm trying to load a DICOM image, but it doesn't work. @code{vil_load.cxx}
prints an error message that mentions lots of image type but not @code{.dcm}.
What's wrong?
@end quotation

The DICOM loader in VXL is not built by default,
because it is large and only medical image people want it.

You will need to rerun CMake and find Cache value called
VXL_BUILD_DICOM.  Turn it on, and rebuild --- it won't need to rebuild
everything.

@item Question 2

@quotation
I'm having problems trying to use vil_image_view_base_sptr to process a
loaded image without worrying about what type the pixels are.
@end quotation

The designers of vil recommend against using @code{vil_image_view_base_sptr}
explicitly --- it is unlikely to behave the way any user might want or
expect. vil never processes pixels independently of their type, and
@code{vil_image_view_base_sptr} is just a smart polymorphic pointer to a
concrete @code{vil_image_view<T>} with some actual pixel type @code{T}.
If you want to convert a loaded image into pixels of a particular type,
use one of the @code{vil_convert} functions

@example
  vil_image_view<vxl_byte> view =
    vil_convert_stretch_range (vxl_byte(), vil_load(my_filename));
@end example

If you want to store an image in memory without worrying about its pixel
type, @code{@xref{vil_memory_image}.}

@item Question 3

@quotation
What co-ordinate system does vil use?
@end quotation

Mostly vil does not assume that the @code{i} and @code{j} co-ordinates have any explicit
meaning. Instead, any external meaning to the @code{i} and @code{j} directions is
provided externally by the user. The choice of the letters @code{i} and @code{j} was an
explicit decision to discourage any assuption of a Cartesian reference frame.

However there are a few places where further assumptions need to be made.
When loading an image, the file format generally provides an explicit mapping
to up/down and left/right. In such cases, vil assumes that @code{image(0,0)} is the
top-left-most pixel in the image, that increasing @code{i} moves right, and that
increasing @code{j} moves down. A similar assumption is used by @code{vil_rotate} to provide
a direction to the rotation angle.

If you need an explicit world co-ordinate frame, within which you can embed an image,
then take a look at the vimt library in @code{vxl/contrib/mul/vimt}. That provides
an world-to-image co-ordinates transform, that can be efficiently manipulated to
provide transforms up to projective complexity.

@end table


@section Optimising Image Processing Algorithms (Advanced Topic)

The design of @code{vil_image_view} (being more flexible than the design of vil1,)
and the state of modern optimising compilers (not as good as they
could be,) means that naive use of vil images may not be as fast as it
should be.

The following example shows the original implementation of
the image fill method.
@example
template<class T>
void vil_image_view<T>::fill(T value)
@{
  for (unsigned p=0;p<nplanes_;++p)
    for (unsigned j=0;j<nj_;++j)
      for (unsigned i=0;i<ni_;++i)
        (*this)(i,j,p)= v;
@}
@end example
This implementation has the advantage of being simple, and easy to test.

In an ideal world the compiler would realise that it doesn't
have to recalculate the location of each pixel each step, but instead keep
a running pointer to the current pixel location. (Of course, in
an ideal world we would be programming using natural language and
a microphone.)
We can make this optimisation explicit.

@example
template<class T>
void vil_image_view<T>::fill(T value)
@{
  T* plane = top_left_;
  for (unsigned p=0; p<nplanes_; ++p, plane+=planestep_)
  @{
    T* row = plane;
    for (unsigned j=0; j<nj_; ++j, row+=jstep_)
    @{
      T* p = row;
      for (unsigned i=0; i<ni_; ++i, p+=istep_) *p = value;
    @}
  @}
@}
@end example
This can halve the run time on some compilers.

The most important rule in code optimisation is to observe how the code
behaves in real life, and concentrate your efforts on where the code
spends most of its time.  In our example, this means the inner most loop
Now, it turns out that in many cases, @code{istep_==1}, because of the
default image layout in memory.  Because of this common case it would
be worth having the compiler generate machine-code for the inner-most
loop in this special case.  We can do this by explicitly testing for
such a special case.

@example
template<class T>
void vil_image_view<T>::fill(T value)
@{
  T* plane = top_left_;

  if (istep_==1)
  @{
    for (unsigned p=0;p<nplanes_;++p,plane += planestep_)
    @{
      T* row = plane-1;
      for (unsigned j=0;j<nj_;++j,row += jstep_)
      @{
        int i = ni_ ;
        while (i>=0) @{ row[i--]=value; @}
      @}
    @}
    return;
  @}

  for (unsigned p=0;p<nplanes_;++p,plane += planestep_)
  @{
    T* row = plane;
    for (unsigned j=0;j<nj_;++j,row += jstep_)
    @{
      T* p = row;
      for (unsigned i=0;i<ni_;++i,p+=istep_) *p = value;
    @}
  @}
@}
@end example

There are two other optimisations going on here.  The first is that
we are using the pointer indexing operator @code{[]}.  Most compilers
treat @code{while (++i<n) @{ *(ptr++)=v; @} } differently from
@code{while (++i<n) @{ ptr[i]=v; @} }, with the latter often
being significantly faster.  This is especially true when @code{ptr}
is a pointer to a character sized type.
The other optimisation makes use of the fact that it is faster to count down to
0 than count up to n.  This is because it is faster to test against a constant, 0,
than against a variable.  Sometimes a compiler figures this out itself,
but by no means always.  One useful refinement that may be possible is to
decrement the index counter right at the end of the loop.  This allows the
compiler to avoid issuing a separate test instruction, since this sort
of test is automatically performed by the processor after a decrement
or other arithmetic operation.

Since we are performing the same operation on every pixel independent
of its absolute or relative position, there is one further optimisation
that can be performed.  In many cases an image will be stored as a
contiguous block of memory.  If this is the case, it may make sense
just to operate on this block of memory as a single dimensional array.
In the case of fill, this may even allow a compiler to issue
a specialised single machine instruction which performs the whole
fill very very fast.  This gives us our final implementation.

@example
template<class T>
void vil_image_view<T>::fill(T value)
@{
  T* plane = top_left_;

  if (is_contiguous())
  @{
    vil_image_view<T>::iterator it = begin();
    vil_image_view<T>::const_iterator end_it = end();
    while (it!=end_it) @{ *it = value; ++it; @}
    return;
  @}

  if (istep_==1)
  @{
    for (unsigned p=0;p<nplanes_;++p,plane += planestep_)
    @{
      T* row = plane-1;
      for (unsigned j=0;j<nj_;++j,row += jstep_)
      @{
        int i = ni_;
        while (i>=0) @{ row[i--]=value; @}
      @}
    @}
    return;
  @}

  for (unsigned p=0; p<nplanes_; ++p, plane+=planestep_)
  @{
    T* row = plane;
    for (unsigned j=0; j<nj_; ++j, row+=jstep_)
    @{
      T* p = row;
      for (unsigned i=0; i<ni_; ++i, p+=istep_) *p = value;
    @}
  @}
@}
@end example

This optimised version was between two and ten times faster than the original
depending on the compiler, image structure, and pixel type.

It should always be born in mind that there is a trade-off in testing for
special cases.  Each test takes time, and this slows the function down
for the non-special cases.  Limit yourself to only testing for very common
cases that have very significant potential speed improvements.

Finally as with all optimisation - be rigorous in comparing the actual
times for your original and optimised code.  Run enough experiments to
measure the statistical spread to see if your improvements are significant.
It is quite common for compiler or processor
quirks to make your optimised code slower than the original.


@section Blocked Images (Advanced Topic)

@subsection Basics

It is possible to encounter images that are much larger than available
memory. For example, a commercial satellite image can easily exceed several
gigabytes in size. The situation is even more dire in the case of
ultra high resolution video where up to 16K X 16K pixel resolutions are
feasible at two bytes per pixel. It is clearly not practical to handle
these images as an in-memory @code{vil_image_view}. The use of a
@code{vil_image_resource} to supply small views of the image at a time
is essential, however the overhead in extracting small views from a
large image file can be substantial.

Consider the example of displaying a small image region near the
center of the image where the view is zoomed in so that one
pixel in the image is mapped to one pixel on the screen. The size of
this image patch might be 2K X 1K pixels.  In order for the image
resource to supply this set of pixels it is necessary to seek past a
gigabyte or more of file-resident data to the middle of the image
and then pull out the several megabytes of pixels needed to construct
the view for display. If the user then wants to pan over a few hundred
pixels to view something just off the screen, a full seek and file
read must be repeated. Under these circumstances, image viewing
performance will be overwhelmingly dominated by disk io bandwidth and
seek times.

To mitigate the overhead of disk access, the image can be organized as
a set of contiguous rectangular blocks of pixels. Blocks may be
randomly scattered within the file, but each block is a contiguous set
of pixels. This way, a view can be assembled by seeking to each block
in the view and then reading the block efficiently. Typical block size
is 512 X 512 or 1024 X 1024 pixels, so that only a few blocks are
needed to display regions of interest at full zoom. To gain even more
efficiency, the blocks can be managed in a cache so the most of the
pixels being displayed on the screen are already in memory.  As the
user pans to a new location, those blocks that are now off the screen
are replaced by new blocks needed to fill in the new region. Thus, the
number of blocks that have to actually be read from the file is
significantly reduced.

The blocked image resource interface has the following virtual methods
in addition to those already defined in the base resource class:

The block size used to store and retrive pixels.
@example
unsigned size_block_i() const
unsigned size_block_j() const
@end example

The number of blocks in column and row to contain the image.
@example
unsigned n_block_i() const
unsigned n_block_j() const
@end example

Retrieving blocks from the resource. Note that a block is a @code{vil_image_view}
and thus ready for use in processing and visualization operations.

@example
vil_image_view_base_sptr
get_block( unsigned  block_index_i, unsigned  block_index_j ) const

bool
get_blocks(unsigned start_block_i, unsigned end_block_i,
           unsigned  start_block_j, unsigned end_block_j,
           vcl_vector< vcl_vector< vil_image_view_base_sptr > >& blocks ) const
@end example
This blocking structure is used internally to implement the basic
method
@example
get_copy_view(unsigned i0, unsigned n_i, unsigned j0, unsigned n_j)
@end example
It is possible that @code{i0, n_i}
and @code{j0, n_j} are not evenly divisible by @code{size_block_i} and
@code{size_block_j}, respectively. In this case the blocks are trimmed
to extract pixels belonging to the specified image view bounds.
In the case of retrieving views near the boundary of the full
image, e.g., @code{n_i=ni(), n_j=nj()}, blocks may lie partially
outside the underlying image.  In this case the pixel values in the
block locations lying outside the full image bounds are undefined.

Similar methods are defined for inserting blocked data into the image resource.
@example
bool put_block(unsigned  block_index_i, unsigned  block_index_j,
               vil_image_view_base const& view)

bool
put_blocks(unsigned start_block_i, unsigned end_block_i,
           unsigned  start_block_j, unsigned end_block_j,
           vcl_vector< vcl_vector< vil_image_view_base_sptr > > const& blocks)
@end example
These methods are used internally to support the virtual
@example
put_view(vil_image_view_base const& im, unsigned i0, unsigned j0)
@end example
 method.  Note that current vil file-based resources do not support reading and
writing on the same open resource. Therefore, a block-oriented image
processing algorithm will have an input resource from which blocks are
retrieved and an output resource where processed blocks are
inserted.

@subsection The Facade and Cached Resource

Many of the advantages of blocking can be realized even if the
underlying image resource is not intrinsically blocked. The
@code{vil_blocked_image_facade} wraps around any image resource and
provides the @code{vil_blocked_image_resource} class interface. That
is, the facade is a sub-class of
@code{vil_blocked_image_resource}. Internally, reading and writing
facade block data is implemented using the usual get and put view methods. In
this case the block view dimensions are those defined by the facade
blocking geometry.

One might wonder how this simulation of a blocked image structure
provides any gain in efficiency for pixel access, since the process
relies on an unblocked file format. A significant gain in performance
can be gained by the addition of a cache. The
@code{vil_cached_image_resource} is a sub-class of
@code{vil_blocked_image_resource} and provides an in-memory store for
most recently retrieved blocks. The size of the cache (in number of
blocks) is specified in the constructor:
@example
vil_cached_image_resource(vil_blocked_image_resource_sptr bir,
                           const unsigned cache_size)
@end example
The cache is implemented as a priority queue based on the ``age'' of a
block. The blocks in the queue are given a timestamp as they enter the
queue. If a block is retrieved from the cache, then the timestamp is
reset to the current time. Otherwise, blocks age as new blocks are
entered into the cache.  When the cache is full, the oldest block is
discarded to make room for a new block.  Note that the queue does not
participate in writing blocks to a resource.

@subsection Using Blocked File Formats

A blocking capability of a resource can be determined by examining the
properties of the resource using the method
@example
bool get_property(char const* tag, void* property_value = 0) const
@end example
Two properties are defined for blocked resources:
@example
vil_property_size_block_i "size_block_i"
vil_property_size_block_j "size_block_j"
@end example
To test if a resource supports blocking one can examine the appropriate properties of the resource:
@example
vil_image_resource_sptr imgr = vil_load_image_resource("my_filename");
...
unsigned sbi=0, sbj=0;
bool is_blocked =
  imgr->get_property(vil_property_size_block_i, &sbi) &&
  imgr->get_property(vil_property_size_block_j, &sbj);
...
@end example
If the resource is blocked then @code{is_blocked} will be true and the
variables, @code{sbi, sbj}, contain the blocking structure for the
resource.

The following example shows how to convert an image resource resource to a blocked file resource.
@example
vil_image_resource_sptr imgr = vil_load_image_resource("my_filename");
unsigned size_block_i = 256, size_block_j = 256;
vil_blocked_image_resource_sptr bimgr =
        vil_new_blocked_image_resource("my_blocked_filename",
                                       imgr->ni(), imgr->nj(), imgr->nplanes(),
                                       imgr->pixel_format(),
                                       size_block_i, size_block_j, "tiff");
if (!vil_copy_deep(imgr, bimgr))
@{ //report trouble
 ...
@}
...
@end example
The new resource, @code{bimgr}, will store pixels in square, 256 X
256, blocks. @code{vil_copy_deep} automatically splits the input
resource into strips if the image is too large to fit in
memory. However, to insure proper handing of block boundaries it is
better to wrap the input resource in a facade with the same blocking
structure as the output. That is,
@example
...
vil_blocked_image_resource_sptr facr =
    vil_new_blocked_image_facade(imgr,sbi, sbj);

if (!vil_copy_deep(facr, bimgr))
@{ //report trouble
 ...
@}
...
@end example
Currently, the @code{tiff} file format and The National
Image Transmission Format (@code{nitf}) image format provide a
@code{vil_blocked_image_resource}, however the @code{nitf} format does not yet support writing. (NOTE THAT TIFF ONLY SUPPORTS BLOCK DIMENSIONS THAT ARE MULTIPLES OF 16.)


@section Pyramid Images (Advanced Topic)

@subsection What are Pyramid Images?

As in the previous section on blocked images, the motivation for
constructing a pyramid image is to manage large images without having
to keep the entire image in memory. Satellite images can easily exceed
all available random access memory so it is impossible to display an
overview of the image.  The blocked image strategy solves the problem
of panning through a large image, but it does not solve the problem of
zooming between different levels of detail. Even with blocking, the
display of a complete overview requires that the entire image must be
in memory.

The zooming problem can be solved by constructing a
@code{vil_pyramid_image_resource}. This resource maintains a number of
file-based copies of an image at different resolution scales. The
original image is called the base image. Each reduced resolution image
resource is called a level of the pyramid. Most typically, the levels
of the pyramid differ by a factor of two in scale in each
dimension. The limit of the size of a pyramid as the number of levels
approaches infinity is 1 + 1/4 + .. =1+1/3.  Thus, the worst case is
33% extra storage to represent all levels of detail.

It is not necessary to have a fixed scale difference between adjacent
levels of the @code{vil_pyramid_image_resource}. When a user requests
a @code{vil_image_view} at a particular scale, a view from the closest
scale in the pyramid is generated. The interface for getting a view
from a pyramid image is illustrated in the following code example.
In this example, the pyramid is stored as a set of image files in a directory.
@example
#include <vil/vil_load.h>
#include <vil/vil_pyramid_image_resource.h>
...
@{
...
 vil_pyramid_image_resource_sptr pir =
                        vil_load_pyramid_resource("pyramid_dir");
 float actual_scale;
 vil_image_view<unsigned short> level_view =
                        pir->get_copy_view(0.25f, actual_scale);
 ...
@}
@end example
This example shows the basic use of a pyramid resource where a level
view 1/4 the scale of the base image is being retrieved. If the
pyramid doesn't contain a level with a scale factor of exactly 0.25,
the closest scale is returned and the scale of the closest level is
returned in @code{actual_scale}. The level view only requires 1/16 the
number of pixels of the base image and can likely be held entirely in
memory. However, the user of the view has to keep in mind that the
image has been scaled down and must manipulate it appropriately.

For example, in rendering an image to the screen, the screen display
scale factor must be compared to the level scale in order to determine
the correct rendering scale. Suppose for example that a display screen
has 1000 x 1000 elements and the base image of the pyramid is 15,000
by 15,000 pixels. The required rendering scale factor for the base
image is 1/15. Suppose that the closest scale level in the
pyramid is 1/16. The resulting level view is then rendered at a scale factor of
16/15 in order to fill the screen. Note however that only one million
pixels are being processed instead of 225 million.

@subsection Subsampling the base image

Level images are formed by subsampling the original base image. In
order to do this subsampling properly, it is necessary to observe the
limitations imposed by the Nyquist sampling theorem. The sample rate
must be greater than twice the highest spatial frequency in the
image. Otherwise aliasing will occur, which appears as interference
bands in the down-sampled image. The Nyquist sampling rate constraint
can be achieved by spatially smoothing the image using a low pass
filter. The filter is designed to remove spatial frequencies that
exceed one half the sampling rate corresponding to the scale of the
pyramid level.

For example, if the base image is being sampled at a scale of 0.5
(every second pixel in each image dimension) then the image must be
pre-smoothed to remove spatial frequencies greater than 1/pixel. A
simple filter for achieving this requirement is to form the average of
the 2x2 pixel neighborhood in the base image corresponding to each
pixel in the downsampled image. This smoothing does not remove all the
higher spatial frequencies but they are significantly attenuated.
Another common approach is to apply a Gaussian low pass smoothing
kernel recursively to each level. Gaussian suppression of higher
spatial frequencies is superior to block averaging. The Gaussian is
cheap to compute since it is separable and can be formed by applying
two 1-d convolutions.

The @code{vil_pyramid_image_resource} class provides the simple 2x2
averaging method for generating pyramid levels that are a factor of
two apart in scale. The user can apply more sophisticated sampling
schemes but this method is adequate for display purposes. Each level
is generated accordingly by applying the static method
@code{vil_pyramid_image_resource::decimate}.
@example
#include <vil/vil_load.h>
#include <vil/vil_pyramid_image_resource.h>
...
@{
...
  vil_image_resource_sptr image;

// generate an image at 1/2 the scale

 image =
   vil_pyramid_image_resource::decimate(base_image, "level_filename", "tiff");

// the base_image resource was generated previously
...
@}
@end example
In the current implementation of the decimate method, the pyramid
levels are generated as blocked images and so a resource file format
that can support blocking must be used.  This choice is primarily a
matter of decimation processing efficiency and to manage level images
that are still too large to fit in memory.  In the example, the ``tiff''
file format is chosen since rectangular block structure is supported.
If the input image is blocked then its native block structure is used.
Otherwise a default blocking (256 x 256) structure is used.

@subsection Storing the pyramid resource

It is necessary to have a file format that can store the multiple
images required for the different resolution levels. The most obvious
approach is to store the images as separate files in a directory.
This format is called @code{vil_pyramid_image_list} and is designated
by the @code{vil_file_format::tag()}, ``pyil''. There is no
restriction on the format of the level files but applications of the
pyramid are generally more efficient if the base image and the level
files are blocked.

A second option for storing image pyramids is the
@code{vil_tiff_pyramid_resource} with
@code{vil_file_format::tag()},``ptif''. In this case, all the pyramid
levels are saved in a single tiff file.  There is no assumed order to
the image headers in the file.  The pyramid level scales are sorted by
the resource to provide the required interface.  The following example
shows creating an output resource of each type and inserting the level
image resources into each pyramid.
@example
#include <vil/vil_new.h>
#include <vil/vil_image_resource.h>
#include <vil/vil_pyramid_image_resource.h>
...
@{
// a list of image resources representing the pyramid levels

    vcl_vector<vil_image_resource_sptr> rescs;
...

// Generate a set of resources at multiple scales
...

// Construct a new multiple file pyramid resource

vil_pyramid_image_resource_sptr pyr_image_list =
        vil_new_pyramid_image_resource("pyramid_directory", "pyil");

// Construct a new single file tiff pyramid resource

vil_pyramid_image_resource_sptr pyr_tiff =
        vil_new_pyramid_image_resource("pyramid.tif", "ptif");

// Store image_resources into the pyramids

  for ( vcl_vector<vil_image_resource_sptr>::iterator rit = rescs.begin();
        rit != rescs.end();  ++rit)
  @{
    pry_image_list.put_resource(*rit);
    pry_tiff.put_resource(*rit);
  @}
...
@}
@end example

Two methods are provided in @code{vil_new} that generate pyramid
images in either the image list or tiff format,
@code{vil_new_pyramid_image_list_from_base} and
@code{vil_new_pyramid_image_from_base}. The following example demonstrates
the use of each pyramid builder.
@example
@{
#include <vil/vil_new.h>
#include <vil/vil_image_resource.h>
#include <vil/vil_pyramid_image_resource.h>
...

vil_image_resource_sptr base_image;

// base_image is loaded or constructed
...

 unsigned number_of_levels = 7;
 bool copy_base = true;
// Generate a pyramid as an image_list (files in a directory)
 vil_pyramid_image_resource_sptr pyril =
     vil_new_pyramid_image_list_from_base("pyramid_directory_path",
                                          base_image,
                                          number_of_levels,
                                          copy_base,
                                          "tiff",
                                          "R");

// Generate a pyramid as a multi-image tiff file
 vil_pyramid_image_resource_sptr pytif =
    vil_new_pyramid_image_from_base("pyramid_file.tif"
                                    base_image,
                                    number_of_levels,
                                    "ptif",
                                    "temporary_dir_path");
...
@}

@end example

In the image list pyramid the user can specify the format of the level
image resource files. In the example the tiff format is specified. The
last argument specifies the base name of the pyramid files, e.g., R0,
R1, ... Rn-1, in the example. The variable @code{copy_base} indicates
whether or not the base image is already in the directory. If not,
then @code{base_image} is copied as a blocked image resource with
default blocking (256 x 256). If a different blocking structure is
desired, the base image can be wrapped in a
@code{vil_blocked_image_facade} resource with the new blocking structure.

For the tiff-based pyramid it is necessary to provide a temporary
directory to generate pyramid levels prior to inserting them into the
single tiff file. Since the pyramid level images can still be too
large for memory, they are constructed as file-based resources.

@section NITF image reading

The National Imagery Transmission Format (NITF) is a highly flexible
and complex format for exchanging digital imagery and its support
data. Our NITF implementation includes a framework for defining the
``tagged record extensions'' and ``data extension segments'' needed by
your application. A framework example, along with the capabilities and
current limitations, is summarized here.

The following code demonstrates how to define a tagged record extension:

@example
vil_nitf2_tagged_record_definition::define("HISTOA", "Softcopy History")
  .field("SYSTYPE",    "System Type",                     NITF_STR(20))
  .field("PC",         "Prior Compression",               NITF_STR(12))
  .field("PE",         "Prior Enhancements",
     NITF_ENUM(4, vil_nitf2_enum_values()
      .value("EH08",   "Enhanced 8bpp")
                    ...
      .value("DGHC",   "Digitized hardcopy")
      .value("UNKP",   "Unknown")
      .value("NONE",   "None")))
  .field("REMAP_FLAG", "System Specific Remap",           NITF_INT(1))
  .field("LUT_ID",     "Data Mapping ID from ESD",        NITF_INT(2))
  .field("NEVENTS",    "Number of Processing Events",     NITF_INT(2))
  .repeat("NEVENTS", vil_nitf2_fields_definitions()
     .field("PDATE",   "Processing Date and Time",        NITF_DAT(14))
     .field("PSITE",   "Processing Site",                 NITF_STR(10))
     .field("PAS",     "Softcopy Processing Application", NITF_STR(10))
     .field("NIPCOM",  "Number of Image Proc. Comments",  NITF_INT(1))
     .repeat("NIPCOM", vil_nitf2_field_definitions()
        .field("IPCOM", "Image Processing Comment",       NITF_STR(80)))
     .field("IBPP",     "Image Bit Depth (actual) ",      NITF_INT(2))
                                                                    ...)
@end example

This code enables the contents of record extension ``HIST0A'' to be
parsed; without it, the unrecognized record would be
skipped. Repeating field values, such as ``IPCOM'', above, are
represented as vectors. Conditional and variable-length fields are
also supported, and C++ functors are used to evaluate expressions
involving tags that specify the length or repetition of other tags.

Currently the library can only read, but not write, NITF 2.0 and 2.1
files, and includes the following capabilities:

@itemize @bullet
@item Files larger than 2GB are supported by building with flag
USE_LFS turned on
@item All four NITF uncompressed data layouts are supported (IMODE=S,
B, P, or R)
@item Most NITF image data types, including 8-, 16-, 32- and 64-bit
signed and unsigned integers, single- and double-precision floating
point numbers, and boolean data are supported. Support for
complex float data is implemented but not tested.
@item Multiple images per file are supported, as are an arbitrary
number of bands per image.
@item Blocked images (NBPR > 1 or MBPC > 1) are supported.
@item Images with look-up tables (LUTs) will read correctly, but
client applications must query the image header for the LUT and apply
it to the image data.
@item JPEG-2000-compressed imagery is supported via a plug-in, as
described in the next section.
@end itemize

The following capabilities are not yet implemented:
@itemize @bullet
@item writing NITF files
@item parsing graphic segments
@item parsing text segments
@item bounds checking of numeric field values
@item additional structured field formatters (e.g., some geocoordinate formats)
@item other compression schemes (e.g., original JPEG, bi-level
compression, vector quantization)
@end itemize

@section JPEG 2000 Support

VIL can be configured to support the reading of JPEG 2000 image files
as well as NITF 2.1 images that are JPEG 2000 compressed.  This
section describes how to set up this capability.

@subsection Install the library

The decompression is handled by a third party library, ECW JPEG 2000
SDK, developed by ER Mapper. The library can be downloaded from
www.ermapper.com, and is currently available under three different
licensing schemes:

@itemize @bullet
@item a ``free use'' license (even for commercial applications) with
the restriction that the compression code supports streams of length
500 MB or less (a moot restriction for VIL, which does not yet support
file writing);
@item a GPL-like ``public use'' license with no limitations on
reading and writing;
@item a ``commercial use'' license for commercial applications that
require the ability to write JPEG 2000 streams longer than 500 MB.
@end itemize

The VXL wrappers around this library were developed using version 3.1
beta of this SDK and have also been tested using version 3.3 RC2, the
latest version available on 4 April 2006.

ER Mapper provides ECW JPEG 2000 SDK with a variety of build systems.
As described in the next section, VXL has been configured to use the
most common one which yields separate NCSEcw and NCSUtil libraries.
Most of the testing has taken place using the dynamically linked
versions of these libraries, but the static versions should work too.

@subsection Configure VXL to use it

Once you have installed and built the ECW JPEG 2000 SDK, you must
configure VXL to find it. Specify these three CMAKE variables:

@itemize @bullet
@item ECW_INCLUDE_DIR: ECW SDK include directory
@item ECW_ncsecw_LIBRARY: NCSEcw library pathname
@item ECW_ncsutil_LIBRARY: NCSEcw library pathname
@end itemize

When CMAKE creates your build files it will automatically add the
appropriate source files and pre-processor definitions.  Once VIL
is built, test the JPEG 2000 decompression capability using the
test program ``test_file_format_read'' in project ``vil_test_all''.
If things are set up correctly, the test program will report
that these two tests passed:

@itemize @bullet
@item JPEG 2000 [j2k,jpc]
@item NITF 2.1 [nitf] (JPEG 2000 compressed)
@end itemize

Note that if you use the dynamically linked version of the ECW JPEG
2000 SDK, your PATH environment variable must contain the /lib
directory that contains NCSEcw and NCSUtil.
